\section{Related work}
\label{s:related}

We divide related work into three categories: data-plane algorithms, programmable
data planes, and languages for packet processing.

\subsection{Data-Plane Algorithms} 
As defined earlier, data-plane algorithms are those algorithms that run within
a switch and execute on every packet. Some data-plane algorithms are now
commonplace and available in all switches: lookup algorithms based on
longest-prefix match, exact match, ternary match and range-search are probably
the best known of these.

  Our focus on data-plane algorithms that aren't widely available on all
switches today because of the considerable engineering effort required for
hardware implementations and the rapidly changing nature of these algorithms.
For instance, load-balancing algorithms such as CONGA~\cite{conga} are
available only on a specific line of CISCO switches.  Active queue-management
algorithms such as CoDel~\cite{codel} need to be extensively
modified~\cite{pie} to suit the architecture of a hardware switch.  Explicit
congestion-control algorithms such as RCP~\cite{rcp} and XCP~\cite{xcp}, and
measurement algorithms such as OpenSketch~\cite{opensketch} have been evaluated
only in FPGA-based platforms.  The ever-growing list of new
algorithms~\cite{pdq, d3, detail} makes it challenging to commit to a hardware
implementation of any of them.

\subsection{Programmable Data Planes}
Several proposals for programmable data planes exist today. Software-based
solutions such as ~\cite{click, fastpass, flexplane} are extremely flexible but
have trouble scaling. NPUs ~\cite{intel} were an attempt to bridge the gap.
While NPUs are faster than pure software routers, they still remain an order of
magnitude slower than merchant silicon chips~\cite{rmt}. Our focus is on
programmable switch architecture that run at line rate: i.e. with performance
comparable to off the shelp merchant silicon chips. These are the most
performant of the programmable switch options and the least expressive, making
programming these devices especially challenging.

\subsection{Packet-processing languages}
Several DSLs explicitly target packet processing. P4~\cite{p4} is the backend
we use in this chapter and is used to program chipsets based on the
RMT~\cite{rmt} and Intel FlexPipe~\cite{flexpipe} architecture. PacketC is a
more expressive packet-processing language that allows memory sharing using
locks and synchronization because the underlying hardware that it targets
allows the same.

\pktlanguage{} is complementary to these languages that are close to the
hardware. For instance, by translating into P4, \pktlanguage{} can automatically be
run on all targets that P4 supports~\cite{lavanya_compiler}. Like any other
nascent language, P4 is likely as more experience is accumulated. In light of
this, our work can be viewed as a recommendation to extend P4 with
transactional actions that span multiple tables, and can benefit from the rest
of P4's abstractions: arbitrary match entries, typed header fields, control
flow across tables, and programmable packet parsing.

\subsection{Transactions}
Transactions are a staple of modern databases. However, they are also
ubiquitous in the world of networking: even if they go by multiple names. For
instance, Click's element abstraction~\cite{click} allows code to be run
without being pre-empted, Intel's compiler for the IXP
architecture~\cite{intel} featured a similar high-level transactional
specification called the PPE for packet processing enginer.
Flexplane~\cite{flexplane} also allows the user to specify code in a high-level
language such as C++ in a similar transactional style and Maple~\cite{maple}
applies the notion on an algorithmic policy for SDN controllers: in essence,
a network-wide transaction.

 \pktlanguage{} is inspired by these prior systems in its use of transactions.
However, it's emphasis on compiling these transactions to extremely minimal,
constrained architectures like the RMT model is new. While this may seem
radical, past work has reported success with pipeliniing datapaths into Verilog
automatically, a similar, if not harder problem than ours.
